process

-add greek
In this thread I would try to present some thoughts that I have for a few years now,
on the subject of expanding a latin typeface to a Greek set.
Many articles and threads have been written about to subject 
which to be honest is almost self proven.
The popularity of a typeface and the fashions in typography and graphic design
are one of the main reasons that there are requests for expanding a typeface.

Apart from the trends, these expansions can be referred as practical tools, that
their main purpose is to support a complex text, a not so popular language, 
even a dead language or a writing system for historical purposes.


-what is the use of the typeface so we can define the char set
So to me as a first step, it is always useful to understand and define the purpose
of the popularity of one font and the possible usage and ability of problem solving 
that this typeface has.

This will mainly help as to define the desired character set that is more suitable
for our project.

So let's be more specific and talk about Greek.
Greek is a script that supports mainly one language or at least one language
with various forms, ancient, katharevousa(a 19th century conceivement) and
the demotic. The everyday one and official since 1976, is the demotic one,
that in its orthography uses only the accent tonos. The other two, still used for 
scholarly, historical, biblical and archaic text/studies, they require multiple accents and breathings
for their correct orthography.
In one word these categories are know as Monotonic and Polytonic Greek.


-proposed charsets
By the years, I have felt the need to redefine these sets, and this is based on my experience as
a typeface designer and on the feedback that I had from users. 
We mention before the variations of the language and now let's see a more analytical usage.
First of all we have a. modern Greek, simple straight forward monotonic.
b. we have scholarly text that can be written in Demotic language but with the use of multiple accents and breathings.
This is something which as weird as it might sound, it happens a lot, especially in literature, poetry and academic essays.
We have to remember that the polytonic spelling was abolished from the educational system just in 1982,
so many of todays educators and academics choose to write in this way, even in their handwriting. In the same category belongs the
support of katharevousa.
c.we have the biblical texts, ancient and historical, that require a more extended set, one that contains
archaic numerals and perhaps their variants.
And lastly d. the support for papyri and archaic texts, that require the archaic variants and possibly the variant letterforms.

The list from there on is almost endless. Depending on the actual text that needs to be typeset,
the set can be expanded to various historic scripts, from Coptic to Ancient Greek numbers, to Cypriot Syllabary.
Useful to open and see the character set of fonts like SBL Greek, that apart from the extended set, has custom
greek numerals, the greek lower case with overbars on  that are used for ancient and medieval manuscripts to denote numerals. 
(*fun fact the number of the beast is χ̅ξ̅σ̅ ) :)

to summarise it:
a. support of modern Greek
b. support for scholarly Greek
c. biblical/ancient-historical
d. archaic, papyri

which translates to:
a. monotonic
b. basic Polytonic
c. extended Polytonic
d. archaic (maybe +14 coptic for compatibility purposes that belong to the "Greek-Coptic" Unicode block)

As I mentioned in the beginning I felt the need to redefine these sets and in order to do that, I'll go one by one to explain
my additions to them.

a. Monotonic (Demotic Greek)
USE: Everyday modern Greek in newspapers, books and websites. Mandatory in schools.

Usually this set is contains the lower case, the uppercase, the tonos accent, the dieresis,
dieresistonos and the greek question mark, identical to the semicolon.
In this set is always useful to add the “anoteleia”, the greek semicolon,
and the two forms of “keraia”, the greek numeric signs. 
We rarely see these signs as part of the monotonic set, and it's a shame, because they have an everyday use.
When they are combined with lower case letters, indicate numbers and they are used mainly as ordinals, especially denoting book volumes, academic semesters etc.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greek_numerals#Table
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greek_numerals#Description

Another addition to the monotonic set that I would like to suggest is the greek ampersand.
We usually we'll find in older publications and on old handmade signage, but in my opinion it keeps some charm of old times and it could easily be used in titles/display settings.
ϗ greek kai symbol(ampersand) 03D7
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kai_(conjunction)
Since unicode 5.1, an uppercase form of that symbols has been added, to match better an all caps setting (03CF).


At the end of this post I have included appendices that show these sets in detail.

b. basic Polytonic(Demotic with breathings, Katharevousa)
USE: Modern Greek in books and particularly traditional or religious publications.

This set contains all the accented letters, lower case and upper case, and the accents+breathings necessary to build these composites. It's basically what Unicode defines as “extended Greek” with the addition of forgotten iota subscript(uni037A).

In this category I avoid adding the archaic numerals. The reason I'm doing that is this:
The specific archaic numerals, even if they aren't many, require on behalf of the designer 
special attention and research. These numerals are rarely used and most of the designers don't even know how to typeset them, 
hence the existing examples of these characters are most of the times really poorly designed. 

My approach might appear a bit unorthodox but the main reason I propose to avoid adding these numerals to our basic Polytonic set
is primarily because I want to promote the expansion of Greek character sets to Polytonic, since it can be done almost instantly and 
mainly because it's going to give the chance to the polytonic users to typeset their text with typefaces a bit more modern looking than Didot.
(fun fact, I'm not personally a user of the polytonic orthography)
And these extra characters are going to be either badly designed or they will be an excuse to holdback and delay the entire expansion.
Of course these numerals can be added any time that are needed, in a second stage of the expansion.

c. extended Polytonic(Katharevousa, Ancient)
USE: Scholarly and religious texts, textbooks for ancient greek studies

This set would be the “traditional” polytonic set, the one that contains the archaic numerals and it's meant to be used
for more advanced and specialised applications than the previous category.

d. archaic, papyri Scholarly Greek + Ancient Greek
USE: Ancient texts, including archaic set and variable letterforms

This set includes the remaining Greek letterforms and numerals that the “Greek-Coptic” block in Unicode includes;
these are the archaic variants and the variant letterform symbols.

note on Coptic
Seven lower case and their respective uppercase letterforms of the Coptic script are part of the “Greek-Coptic” Unicode Block,
since version 1.1.
The similarity and the historical connections of the two scripts lead to shared codes in Unicode, 
which leads sometimes to  misunderstanding  of which is Greek which is Coptic, and if these 14 Coptic characters
need to be part of an extended Greek character set.
In my opinion the need of Coptic set needs to be separately decided and executed. 
Coptic is a language that is used only for liturgical language in the Coptic church thus a more traditional set was in order.
In 2005 unicode version 4.1, devoted an separate block for the coptic set(2C80-2CFF). This set doesn't include the 14 glyphs of the
“Greek-Coptic” one, but they should be treated like a homogenic design.



